Design document for selecting the new framework for kgateway e2e testing (#14128)
kgateway-dev/kgateway: design/13891-e2e-framework-selection.md

# EP-13891: E2E Testing Framework Evaluation

* Issue: [13891](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway/issues/13891)
* Parent epic: [Modernize and improve kgateway end-to-end testing](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway/issues/13351)

> * Reference PRs:

Author: see 8fb478bdb0d5dffa58cc3b85f11e0e456b53c86b

The current custom framework is **slow** (per-test setup — manifest application, image pre-pull, dynamic resource discovery, `EventuallyPodsRunning` — dominates execution time) and **heavy on framework artifacts** (a new test requires a `TestCase` map, a `BaseTestingSuite` embedding, a `SetupSuite` method, and registration in a central `tests/*_tests.go` file before the first assertion is written — the scaffolding often outweighs the test logic).

This document evaluates whether kgateway should keep evolving the existing framework or migrate to one of the established alternatives in the Kubernetes ecosystem. The complementary write-up in [#12981 ("Good tests")](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway/issues/12981) and the prototype in [#12993 ("fast e2e tests")](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway/pull/12993) make a concrete case for what a faster, simpler test loop should look like.

The conclusion is to keep the custom framework and invest in incremental improvements. The reasoning is in [Recommendation](#recommendation); the rejected alternatives and their tradeoffs are in [Alternatives](#alternatives).

## Goals

These are the potential areas for improvement. 

> * **Speed & efficiency.** To increase in the speed of execution. 

Author: improved in 8fb478bdb0d5dffa58cc3b85f11e0e456b53c86b

> * **Accessibility.** Easy to read and write. Minimize the kgateway-specific strucutres a contributor has to learn before writing their first test. 

Author: fixed in 8fb478bdb0d5dffa58cc3b85f11e0e456b53c86b

* **No install management.** The conformance runner expects a Gateway API implementation to already be running. Install lifecycle is not part of the conformance test framework and will have to be managed by kgateway-specific code.
* **Incompatible with upstream TLS bootstrap.** The framework's `suite.Setup()` performs TLS bootstrap that interferes with kgateway's install flow. We must manage TLS configuration ourselves.
* **Multi-install scenarios are awkward.** A single `ConformanceTestSuite` value points at one cluster install. Tests that compose multiple installs need either separate Go test binaries (one suite per install) or to remain on the legacy framework as a permitted exception.
* **Helpers follow spec evolution.** The upstream `kubernetes.*`, `http.*`, and `roundtripper` packages evolve with the Gateway API specification. We accept this as the cost of letting the upstream community maintain the helpers — it directly serves the **Maintenance burden** goal. The test framework version is pinned via `go.mod` to match the Gateway API version kgateway targets.

### Comparison

| Concern | Current kgateway | sigs/e2e-framework | Gateway API conformance |
|---|---|---|---|

> | Test structure | `testify/suite` + `BaseTestingSuite` | `func TestX` + `features.Feature` builder | `ConformanceTest` value, dispatched by orchestrator |

Author: I don't see double pipe in whole comparison table.

`TestMain` ([`main_test.go`](https://github.com/devc007/kgateway/blob/basicrouting-gw-api-conformance/test/sigs_gateway_conformance/features/basicrouting/main_test.go)) constructs the suite once for the package:

```go
var suite *confsuite.ConformanceTestSuite

func TestMain(m *testing.M) {
    if err := common.SetupConformanceSuite(gatewayClassName, []fs.FS{manifestFS}); err != nil {
        fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, "failed to set up conformance suite: %v\n", err)
        os.Exit(1)
    }
    suite = common.GetSuite()
    os.Exit(m.Run())
}
```

`common.SetupConformanceSuite` ([`common/suite.go`](https://github.com/devc007/kgateway/blob/basicrouting-gw-api-conformance/test/sigs_gateway_conformance/common/suite.go)) is an in-repo helper that builds the client, calls `confsuite.NewConformanceTestSuite`, and configures `suite.Applier` directly instead of calling `suite.Setup()` — the upstream `Setup()` performs TLS bootstrap that does not fit kgateway's install flow.

> The test function applies the Gateway and backend, resolves the controller name, and dispatches the `ConformanceTest` value via `test.Run(t, suite)` ([`routing_test.go`](https://github.com/devc007/kgateway/blob/basicrouting-gw-api-conformance/test/sigs_gateway_conformance/features/basicrouting/routing_test.go)):

Reviewer: Lets update all these links to your repo to the fearture branch in the org repo, eg https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway/blob/lfx-e2e-framework-poc/test/e2e_sigs_framework/features/basicrouting/routing_test.go for this one

This is to keep all resources internal to the repo. Applies to ~11 places.

Author: updated in 1e49d5f6b1f1967a3a51ce0ee5518e65db4833f1

#### Current framework

File: [`test/e2e/features/basicrouting/suite.go`](../test/e2e/features/basicrouting/suite.go)

```go
type testingSuite struct {
    *base.BaseTestingSuite
    localGateway common.Gateway
}

func NewTestingSuite(ctx context.Context, testInst *e2e.TestInstallation) suite.TestingSuite {
    return &testingSuite{
        base.NewBaseTestingSuite(ctx, testInst, setup, testCases),
        common.Gateway{},
    }
}

func (s *testingSuite) SetupSuite() {
    s.BaseTestingSuite.SetupSuite()
    address := s.TestInstallation.Assertions.EventuallyGatewayAddress(s.Ctx, "gateway", "default")
    s.localGateway = common.Gateway{...}
}

func (s *testingSuite) TestGatewayWithRoute() {

>     s.assertSuccessfulResponse()  // Finally!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    s.assertSuccessfulResponse()
```

}
```

Three registration touchpoints before the test logic. First, `setup` and `testCases` map in `suite.go`:

```go
var (
    setup = base.TestCase{
        Manifests: []string{"testdata/gateway-with-route.yaml"},
    }
    testCases = map[string]*base.TestCase{
        "TestGatewayWithRoute": {
            Manifests: []string{"testdata/service.yaml"},
        },
        "TestHeadlessService": {
            Manifests: []string{"testdata/headless-service.yaml"},
        },
    }
)
```

Second, explicit registration in `tests/kgateway_tests.go`:

```go
kubeGatewaySuiteRunner.Register("BasicRouting", basicrouting.NewTestingSuite)
kubeGatewaySuiteRunner.Register("Cors", cors.NewTestingSuite)
// ... 50+ more registrations ...
```

> The framework requires: a `TestCase` map definition, a `BaseTestingSuite` embedding, a `SetupSuite` method, explicit registration in a central file, and finally—after all that—the test method itself. The ceremony (three files, inheritance chain, setup maps) dominates the test code volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The framework requires: a `TestCase` map definition, a `BaseTestingSuite` embedding, a `SetupSuite` method, explicit registration in a central file, and  test method itself.
```

* **Consolidate backend deployments onto the defaults package.** Suites have grown a habit of deploying their own backend (httpbin, nginx, echo) instead of reusing the canonical ones the defaults package already provides. Collapsing onto shared backends cuts duplicate pod start-up and image-pull cost, removes inconsistency across suites (different images asserting the same thing), and makes future backend changes a single edit instead of a sweep.
* **Reuse the shared BaseGateway instead of installing a per-suite Gateway.** A large fraction of suites install their own Gateway even though they only need a plain HTTP listener that the shared BaseGateway already provides. Attaching those suites' HTTPRoutes to the BaseGateway removes the per-suite Gateway apply, the wait for it to be programmed, and the corresponding Envoy Deployment — directly attacking the dominant per-test setup cost.

#### 2. Remove dead manifests, helpers, and assertion variants

[`test/e2e/`](../test/e2e/) has accumulated test YAML, helpers, and assertion variants that are no longer referenced. Audit and remove. 

## Alternatives

> // stronger among both framework investigated. 

Reviewer: Agree, this is odd formatting

> // stronger among both framework investigated. 

Author: improved in 8fb478bdb0d5dffa58cc3b85f11e0e456b53c86b

* **The bottleneck is environment setup, not the framework.** CI wall-clock is bounded as much or more by image build, image pull, cluster provision, and kgateway install as by test execution. A framework migration would not address the dominant cost.
* **Substantial new helper code would still be required.** The framework's upstream helpers cover generic Gateway API testing, but kgateway-specific behavior needs a meaningful helper layer in-repo regardless.
* **Full migration risks landing partially.** The "fast test" pattern from [PR #12993](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway/pull/12993) is a much smaller scope and is still only partially rolled out. A framework migration is many times larger and risks leaving the codebase maintaining two frameworks for an extended period.

### Alternative 2 — Adopt `sigs.k8s.io/e2e-framework`

We prototyped this in PR [#1](https://github.com/devc007/kgateway/pull/1), with code under `test/e2e_sigs/`. The framework gives a clean Go-test-native programming model and composable lifecycle steps (`env.Environment` with `Setup`/`Finish` hooks). It is used by Crossplane, kueue, and several other CNCF projects.

We didn't choose it because:

> * **It provides only the lifecycle scaffolding.** No assertion library, no Gateway API readiness helpers, no manifest applier, no eventual-consistency HTTP probe. The POC's `assertions/assertions.go` and `common/gateway/gateway.go` are the start of an in-repo equivalent of what `sigs.k8s.io/gateway-api/conformance/utils/` already provides. Adopting this framework means owning that reimplementation indefinitely — the exact failure mode the **Maintenance burden** goal is meant to prevent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **It provides only the lifecycle scaffolding.** No assertion library, no Gateway API readiness helpers, no manifest applier, no eventual-consistency HTTP probe. The POC's `assertions/assertions.go` and `common/gateway/gateway.go` are the start of an in-repo equivalent of what `sigs.k8s.io/gateway-api/conformance/utils/` already provides. Adopting this framework means owning the implementation of that functionality.
```

> * **The same maintenance-burden concern applies.** Even more so than the conformance framework, `sigs.k8s.io/e2e-framework` provides only generic lifecycle scaffolding — no manifest applier, no Gateway API readiness helpers, no eventual-consistency HTTP probe. We would own all of that in-repo indefinitely.

Reviewer: This point is a duplicate of the one above and can be dropped.

Author: removed in 8fb478bdb0d5dffa58cc3b85f11e0e456b53c86b

> * **Two frameworks is a tax.** Running the upstream Gateway API conformance suite for spec coverage *and* `sigs.k8s.io/e2e-framework` for kgateway-specific tests means contributors switch mental models depending on which directory they are in.

Reviewer: We can drop this one too, a mental model of the conformance test framework is not needed - they live in a different repo and are unlikely to be touched by kgateway devs
